Listening Task Worksheet

Free Thinking “What Does Game Playing Teach Us?”  
The aim of this task is to give you an opportunity to practice referencing skills when using audiovisual material to support your work (in this case, the AV material is a radio programme).  
After the programme begins with a gentle introduction to several of the guests, Irving Finkelstarts
speaking at about 03:40 until about 12:00; Laura Mitchell’s contribution, on games and play, and the
magic circle, starts at about 14:30 and lasts until about 24:00, when the discussion turns to rules and
to cheating, although you should feel free to listen to the entire programme in order to answer any two
of the following questions, which are not presented in the same chronological order as the discussion.

1. Why do we play games? (This is a big question, but rein-in your answer to just a couple of
key points, in no more than two or three sentences).  
2. What is meant by the term "homo ludens"?  
3. What is the term for the special time and place in which games are conducted?  
4. How might we distinguish between "play" and "game"?  
5. What, according to the contributors to the programme, are the advantages of "analogue"
(or non-digital) games?  
6. Why might the Royal Game of Ur (aka 20 squares) have spread widely across the ancient
Middle East, while Senet (aka 30 squares) was played only in Ancient Egypt?  
7. What is the term used to describe the application of game-type sensations (such as "flow
state") to other, productive, non-game, activities?  
8. Give an example of one of game-type concepts used in the programme to incentivise nongame activity.  
9. What, according to Bobby Seagull, is the word from football tactics used to describe trying to
gain an advantage by taking a risk to exploit the balance between risk (e.g. losing 5 points)
and reward (e.g. gaining 10 points and an opportunity for three further questions) in
University Challenge?  

Be sure to include author-date references in your answer, for example:  
The challenge of playing, and beating, an algorithm, pales when compared to the
experience of playing, and beating, another human player (“What Does Game-Playing
Teach Us?” 2018 34:20).  
Here, the title of the programme, in inverted commas, the date of broadcast, and the time the cited
material occurs in the programme as displayed in the progress bar, are provided in brackets,
allowing your reader to locate the material cited. Further details of the programme will be provided
in the bibliography.  
Because the radio programme is one programme or episode in a series, both the programme title
and the series title should be provided in the bibliography. When citing an online source, the date of
access should also be included. For example:

Free Thinking “What Does Game Playing Teach Us?” (2018) First broadcast on BBC Radio 3. Available
online: <https://www.bbc.co.uk/sounds/play/p06w28j6> (Date of access: 4 September 2021).
