1. What does LeBlanc mean when he say’s ‘we cannot create drama’ (LeBlanc 2006, p. 440)?

LeBlanc (2006) informs us that the game designer cannot foresee how a game will unfold. What they
can do is provide situations for the player to experience dramatic tension which Le Blanc refers to as
“the circumstances” (Le Blanc 2004, p. 440). The mesh between different aspects of the game such
as the board and rules are seen as the mechanics of the game. The “circumstances” or situations are
a product of these mechanics.

2. What is the word LeBlanc uses to describe the rules, the pieces and any other necessary
elements that are required to play a game?

Le Blanc uses the word “Mechanics” (Le Blanc 2004. p. 440) to describe the rules of the game.

3. LeBlanc uses the term “dynamics” to describe the way in which a game “behaves” or
responds when the various game elements are activated by players. What, according to
LeBlanc, is the relation between a game’s dynamics and its mechanics?

With the games mechanics clearly defined as the elements that make up the game, this being the
board, the pieces, any dice involved in the game or anything else that is bound by the rules of the
game. The dynamics are then the interplay of the different elements. The relationship between the
two is described as one of “emergence” ( Le Blanc 2004, p. 441).

4. According to LeBlanc’s framework, the things that players do with or get from a game,
beyond creating an interplay of dynamics and mechanics, is defined by the term
“aesthetics”. Give an example of “aesthetics” from your own game play experience,
referring to the last non-digital game you played by way of example.

The concept of “aesthetics” (Le Blanc 2004, p. 445) within a game has been proven throughout
history with imagery being used to portray different things. My most recent experience of this has
been the various different incarnations of The Game of Goose throughout history. The aesthetics in
this game have evolved throughout the years to portray what was wanted by the creator. The game
itself was a simple spiralised board chase game which obviously inspired the more common and well
renown “Snakes & Ladders”. The game requires no skill and is ended by chance. There also seemed
to be many opportunities to stake real money into the game to help to create any “dramatic
tension” (Le Blanc 2004, p. 445).

5. Review the material on pp. 442–446. Use the concept of “dramatic tension”, along with
one or two other terms/concepts from the article that you deem relevant, to describe the
current state of the game pf Noughts and Crosses shown below. “Crosses” started and has
had two moves; “Noughts” has had one move and is about to play:

The situation currently unfolding in the example has built up dramatic tension by always being one
move away from a finish. In this case the fact that crosses have used the two corners and if during
noughts next move, they fail to see the threat of not claiming the centre position then the game will
be over, crosses will have made a diagonal three.  
Assuming that noughts does identify the threat and takes the centre position, we are then relying on
the fact that crosses see the danger of noughts completing a diagonal line by occupying the top left
square, again if they fail to see this threat then the game is over, and the noughts player will win the
game.  
Again, assuming that crosses see the danger and occupied the top left square, then they have then
won the game. Noughts’ next move would be to either block of the square on the left centre or the
top centre – however with only one move to take blocking both is impossible.  
Throughout the sequence there is uncertainly in the fact that both players are expected to see the
danger opposed to them, but the uncertainty is that they may not. Any instance of this could have
lost them the game (assuming that the opposition player sees the opportunity and takes the final
move). The inevitability of the game is that it will end eventually.   There are only 9 possible moves to
play and only a mistake by either player will result in the end of the game prematurely.
The only way for this current game to have gone the entirety of the 9 moves would have been if
noughts had of played the centre position in the first instance after crosses had occupied one of the
corners.
