Assignment Brief: Game Analysis Essay

Select one of the early modern or ancient games you have studied on the module and, drawing on
appropriate sources, provide some brief historical context for your chosen game (where it is from
and how it is played, along with any other relevant information about its cultural meaning and/or
how it may have evolved) together with a brief description of the game and game mechanics,
drawing on appropriate terminology. Comment on your experience of playing the game (how long is
a game? What is the object of the game? Are there any particular tactics or other aspects of
gameplay that make the game enjoyable or fun to play?) Finally, comment on whether you think the
game would be enjoyed today: if so, why? If not, briefly discuss which aspect(s) of the game would
have to be changed, and how, in order to make the game appeal to a contemporary audience or
audience segment. Support your discussion of game mechanics and design elements with close
reference to suitable sources concerned with game design.

• Support your discussion with close reference to relevant material drawn from the module reading
list (you are also directed to material in Salen & Zimmerman (2004) and Salen & Zimmerman eds
(2006). Acknowledge your sources in the body of the essay using the author-date system and
provide a bibliography listing all the works consulted.

• Please include a word count at the end of the essay, before the bibliography.

• Be sure to append a complete and accurate bibliography to your essay, ordered alphabetically by
author surname, using a Harvard-style form of bibliographical presentation. A separate “reference”
list is not required.

• Word length: 1500 words (excluding bibliography)

The Royal Game of Ur was excavated in the ancient city of Ur by Sir Leonard Woolley and his team
sometime between 1926 – 1930 (Fig 1). The ancient city of Ur would now be located on the south
bank of the Euphrates in Iraq. One of the boards located was buried in the tomb of a princess for use
of the game in the afterlife. This particular board was made from the most expensive of materials
including red limestone and lapis lazuli, the latter of which would have been imported at a great cost
from Afghanistan. The game itself is thought to be around 4500 years old and although
this may not be the oldest board game known to us it is the oldest one with a documented set of
rules which instantly makes the game more significant.


Fig 1. Game of Ur board. Wooden and Shell carvings (2600BC – 2400BC). Excavated by Sir Leonard
Woolley in 1928. © Trustees of the British Museum.

Also known as ‘The game of twenty squares” the game went through a significant change at the turn
of the third to the second millennium BCE. The rightmost squares were unfolded to form a straight
tail (Fig 2). It is also credited with being around the time when the number of pieces or counters
used by the players was reduced from 7 to 5 pieces. (Crist, Dunn-Vaturi and de Voogt 2016, p. 83)

Fig 2. The game of twenty in the second and first millennia BCE, and the route of play. Crist, W,
Dunn-Vaturi, A, & Voogt, (2016) Ancient Egyptians at Play: Board Games Across Borders, Bloomsbury
Publishing Plc, London. Page 84.

The rules were found written in cuneiform on a clay tablet in the second century BC written by a
Babylonian astronomer. Thousands of years after the date of the first board and clearly showing its
longevity.

The game of Ur is a race game played between 2 people with both competitors entering from their
side of the board. The singular strip through the centre of the board is shared between the two
players and allows the use of strategy and tactics. Landing on any of the rosettes along the board
results in another throw of the dice for the player that landed on it. Landing on another players
piece results in the removal of that piece from the board. That piece must then return to the start of
the board and start the process over again. Additionally landing on the rosette along the shared part
of the board represents safety for the player and the counter/piece can not be removed if landed on
by the opposition, it can only be jumped over.

The dice used traditionally for the game are not what we would know as today as dice. Tetrahedrons
or four-sided sticks which were made from sheep or ox knucklebones were used instead. The
formers use is exampled in The British Museum’s celebration of tabletop day in 2017 (Tom Scott vs
Irving Finkel: The Royal Game of Ur | PLAYTHROUGH | International Tabletop Day 2017,
youtube.com 4m44s).

The existence of the game of Ur for such a long period of time shows both its accessibility to all types
of people as well as its exciting and easy gameplay. Had the game been only available to the wealthy
or over complicated to the point where the payer base was extremely small then the game, I feel
would have died out much sooner. This period of time being about 3000 years allowed for evolution
of the game and a version was noted as being played as recently as the 1900’s in an interview with
Irving Finkel (Green, 2008) where he described speaking to a lady in her 70’s who recalled its
popularity when she was growing up in Israel.

The game appealed to me as it appears to be the earliest board game we studied that allows the use
of tactics and a very obvious game plan. Albeit with an element of luck coming from the number
shown on the dice. The tetrahedrons have four points, two of which were painted at the tip.

When four of the tetrahedrons were thrown together the number of painted tips pointing upwards
would indicate the number thrown. This made it entirely possible to roll a zero and in fact it made it
equally as likely to throw as a four (being one sixteenth). Throwing a one or a three is the next most
likely with a one in four chance and the most likely number thrown is a two at a three eighths
chance. This mathematical perspective leans into LeBlanc’s (2006) definition of drama when he
informs us that the game designer cannot foresee how the game will unfold.

A predominant mechanic of the game is the rosette squares dotted across the board. These squares
appear to be very consistent across many iterations of the board and indicate a double throw. The
most interesting part of this mechanic is that if a counter lands on the rosette and the player rolls
again the counter that the player moves after the second throw does not have to be the counter
that landed on the rosette. This could in theory create more than one opportunity to knock an
opposition player off the board or help in getting as many pieces on to the board as possible. It
allows for a very interesting dynamic (LeBlanc, 2004) of trying to see what the opposition player is
more likely to do and then trying to counter that style of play.

During my experience, to play the game to completion using 7 pieces took about ten to fifteen
minutes, however this time did go down the more familiar myself and my opponent got with the
rules. The object of the game is to get your counters off the board by racing through the middle and
exiting opposite your entry square. This can only be done with an exact throw. Which is unlike goose
game where a roll of three while on square sixty-three would result in going forward one square and
then back by two, leaving you a square behind the one you were on before you rolled. I felt that this
kept the game more straight forward as it almost seemed to be counter productive to move the
game pieces backwards.

A popular tactic that developed during my playing of the game was to fill the board with as many
counters as possible. Occupying the initial 4 squares would give you a high chance of knocking off an
opposition piece that had only just joined the shared central strip of squares. In addition to this the
rosette located along the shared central strip provided safety to the player that landed on it.
Occupying this square until your opponent was forced to jump over you would leave them
vulnerable and was also a common tactic that developed.
Observation is something that improved the more that we played the game. Knowing that the
highest roll possible was a 4, when occupying the shared rosette through the centre you would be
able to see if your opponent was 4 or more squares behind you. This gave you the opportunity to
race towards the end of the board and get your counter clear of danger. The risk here was always
the possibility of the opponent landing on a rosette themselves and catching you up sooner than
anticipated.

These tactics along with the anticipation of the roll of the dice made for a very exciting and
enthralling game to be played each time. In the ten games that I played there was never a moment
where either of the participants concluded defeat or gave up. The size of the board always seems to
make every piece appear to be in reach of the enemy. The only true time when the game was over
seems to be when the first player has successfully navigated their final piece past the shared path
and is approaching their exit point of the board. Even then, the game requires an exact roll to exit
the board so it becomes a straight race of luck to see if the second player can catch that last piece up
before the opposition can roll the exact number needed. I came away from playing the game to find
it an enjoyable experience and can see why it survived for thousands of years. The accessibility to be
played both young and old along with the element of luck makes the whole thing a level playing field
with no real advantage to either party as long as the rules were understood.

I would be interested to play the later iteration of the board where the final 4 squares of a player’s
path are added to the central strip (to create a longer path of conflict) (fig 2). In this variant a
player’s piece is no longer safe until it has successfully exited the board. This could make the game
more exciting, however, with the pieces always seemingly at risk it may also make the game a lot
longer to play.

I believe that this game could easily be enjoyed by many today. The simplicity of the game makes it
very accessible and playing the same opponent multiple times with most likely result in a similar
number of wins for each player. A point that I proved to myself by introducing and playing the game
with my 5-year-old daughter, who quickly grasped the concept of the game and then in turn
requested another game at the end of the first. Unlike the goose game which I personally found to
be quite tedious when waiting to roll the final number required to win the game. Ur allows you to
interfere with your opponent’s pieces which in my opinion is infinitely more interesting.

Word Count = 1640

Bibliography:

British Museum (2017) “Tom Scott vs Irving Finkel: The Royal Game of Ur”. Duration: 25 mins.
Available online: <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WZskjLq040I> Date Of Access: November
22nd 2021.

Crist, W., Dunn-Vaturi, A. E. and de Voogt, A. (2016) Ancient Egyptians at Play. See Ch. 4 ‘The Game
of Twenty: a foreign acquisition’ pp. 81–102.
Available online: <https://ebookcentral-proquestcom.uos.idm.oclc.org/lib/ucsl/reader.action?docID=4196314&ppg=96>.

Green, W. (2008) ‘Big Game Hunter’. Time Magazine. Available online here:
<http://www.williamgreenwrites.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/11/Big-Game-Hunter-Timemagazine.pdf>

LeBlanc, M. “Tools for Creating Dramatic Game Dynamics”. In: Salen, K. and Zimmerman, E. eds
(2006). The Game Design Reader: A Rules of Play Anthology. MIT Press. London. pp. 438–459. Link:
<https://bit.ly/2Wv4pSW>.
